Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes and
today I'm joined by Doctor Alan Love. He is
distinguished McKnight University professor of philosophy and Winton chair
in the liberal arts at the University of Minnesota,
as well as director of the Minnes the Center
for Philosophy of Science. And today we're going to
focus on topics such as developmental biology, evolvo approaches
in biology, evolvability, evolutionary novelties, and some other related
topics. So, Doctor Love, welcome to the show. It's
a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you for having me.
So, let me start by asking you, what is
developmental biology? Because of course, on the show, I've
already talked with many evolutionary biologists, but not so
much with developmental biologists. So what is this discipline
about?
So, developmental biology is the scientific discipline that studies
of how organisms grow and mature from The sort
of earliest stages, say, as fertilized eggs, uh, all
the way through sexual reproduction and maturity, and even,
uh, aging, uh, as well. So, a developmental biologist
is trying to understand and explain, uh, how do
those changes take place? Why does an organ form
properly, at the right place, at the right time?
With the right features, um, generation after generation, think
of, you know, standard, uh, features like your heart
or your lungs, um, your kidneys, all of these
structures are rebuilt every generation, uh, when an organism
develops and the developmental biologist is trying to understand.
How do those patterns get set up? How do
those structures take the right shapes? Uh, HOW do
the cells and other aspects of the organism move
into the right place and be at the right
locations? And so a developmental biologist is interested in
all those things, um, and has been for a
long time because they have, uh, clearly been a
big challenge to try and understand.
But what is the relationship between developmental biology and
evolutionary biology? How, how does development relate to evolution?
So that's a big question and one that involves
a lot of uh sort of potential controversy, but
at a very basic level, um, evolution, um, assumes
that variation is somehow generated in each, uh, um,
population. Uh, SUCH that that variation would be subject
to selection if it, uh, exhibited fitness differences, um,
of some kind. Well, development is precisely the process
whereby that variation emerges. So if you're gonna understand
how evolution can act on variation. Then you want
to understand how that variation came to be in
the first place. In order to understand how that
variation came to be in the first place, you've
got to understand development. So at a basic level,
that's how development and evolution hook up. Now, The
significance of that is debated. For some, the relationship
is relatively straightforward because the thought is that variation
is simply a natural part of development and there's
no special insight needed for the evolutionary process, and
so the study of development doesn't add very much
to our evolutionary understanding. At the opposite end of
the spectrum, you've got individuals who think that because
development is constrained and shaped by different kinds of
physical or um genetic kind of dynamics. Evolution actually
is impacted severely by the way development occurs, and
therefore, if we ignore development, we really misunderstand evolution.
So in some respects, the debate about the relationship
between development and evolution comes down to how much
researchers think developmental processes really make a big difference.
In how evolution happens, and some think it makes
a big difference and others disagree.
OK, but then how can development influence evolution?
Well, so, uh, uh, again, coming back to the
sort of very basic idea that development is the
basis for the generation of variation, if it's the
case that development involves certain kinds of patterns, and
those patterns are reliably occurring. Then those patterns will
be present, and that is what evolution will have
to work on. And so if certain kinds of
variation is not produced by a developing embryo, then
that variation cannot be available for evolution to act
upon. And so, if you think about uh uh
those sorts of possibilities, whether it's uh a sort
of shape of a trait or the uh nature
of particular uh morphological features, um, if development, uh,
really sort of constrains what's possible. Then evolution will
be constrained in what it can produce over long
periods of time. Uh, IN a sense, no variation,
no evolution, and so we understand whether the variation
is possible by studying developmental biology.
But can development, uh, apart from constraining, can it
also direct evolution in any way?
So that is a part of how researchers have
been thinking about this, uh, for quite some time.
So the language of constraint that I've been using
is, is one traditional way of thinking about how
development affects evolution. Another way of thinking about it
is in terms of facilitation. That is development actually
makes certain. Changes more likely, um, makes them easier
to happen in some respects, um, and therefore development
can actually facilitate. Uh, EVOLUTION, one might think about
it as lines of least resistance that development makes
certain kinds of pathways more accessible than others. So
to some degree you can even uh think of
two words as representing those uh two different ideas.
You can have the language of constraint. Which is
about somehow limiting evolutionary possibilities, but you can also
have the language of evolvability or facilitation that makes
possible certain kinds of evolutionary trajectories.
What is a developmental bias?
So developmental bias is one way of describing how
a developing system might have inherent in it certain
ways that it channels, uh, patterns of variation that
are available for, uh, development. So if you have,
uh, certain kinds of constraints on Uh, say the
size of structures or, uh, whether or not certain
kinds of, uh, features grow first and other features
grow second or third, um, those sorts of biases
and how development works can then lead to certain
kinds of Um, biases in what's possible evolutionarily. So,
to study developmental bias, you're interested in trying to
understand what those patterns are, um, and then see
if they map on to our broader understanding of
the pattern of evolution.
So earlier you mentioned that development is the source
of vari variation that then evolution works with. But
I mean, uh, at least in a more basic
understanding of evolution with Tend to say that variation
stems from random genetic mutation. I mean, what, uh,
I, I mean, so what do you mean exactly
when you say that variation stems from development? Yeah,
so that's, that's a good question because it highlights
an important way in which uh some traditional views
about evolution sort of skipped development because Yes, one
source of variation is mutation, um, mutation that appears
in an undirected fashion with respect to the organism's
needs. But that mutation has to somehow manifest in
the organism's physiology or morphology. And the way that
it manifests is gonna be through developmental processes. And
we know now that you can have a mutation.
That doesn't have any effects, and you can have
a mutation that has very large effects, and the
reason why a mutation has or doesn't have effects
is oftentimes due to how the system develops. And
so systems can buffer, uh, mutations or systems can
be highly sensitive to mutations, and the only way
to understand that is to study development. And to
study how those sensitivities or those bufferings occur. And
if you only say, well, there was a mutation
and then we got variation, that's simply to say,
well we put development in a black box and
we don't understand how the mutation actually generated the
variation. And since we know that simply having a
mutation doesn't automatically mean you get variation. The only
way to know the consequences of a mutation for
evolution is to study the developmental processes by which
its effects are manifested.
Could you give us perhaps some examples of non-genetic
developmental processes that play out in evolution?
What do you, um, uh, not quite sure about
the question.
I mean, those developmental processes that would influence evolution,
could you give us some examples of that?
Yeah, so, um, classic example would be along the
lines that I mentioned before in terms of, uh,
whether something grows earlier or grows later. Uh, SO,
in, uh, amphibians, um, Uh, uh, when you look
at, uh, different taxa, um. Uh, SO looking at,
say, at, um, uh, frogs versus, um, salamanders, um,
or sort of other taxa, and you dig in
deeply to like, well, how is it the case
that their digits develop, right? And you sort of
look carefully and it turns out that their digits
don't develop in the same way, that in some
cases, um, uh, one digit, say your first digit
or your thumb. A That one grows first, and
then say your pinky digit grows last or uh
some other pattern like that. And then you say,
well, wait, if we look at, say, the evolutionary
patterns of digit evolution. Do they reflect these developmental
details? And sure enough, um, in a number of
studies, what researchers have found is that the pattern
of evolution follows the pattern of development. For example,
if you have a pinky digit growing last, you're
more likely to lose that digit evolutionarily. Because it
grows last and therefore is more likely to be
uh truncated um in a developmental process. Similarly, if
a different digit grows last, you get a different
pattern. And so the idea is that if you
don't understand how that development works, You don't understand
why you get that evolutionary pattern. Similarly, um, uh,
other concerns, uh, relate to the physics of development
and the fact that certain kinds of, um, physical
factors that occur, uh, during development in terms of
how uh shape or size or sort of physical
interactions take place, uh, can constrain or facilitate certain
kinds of development. And so those are gonna affect
small animals differently than they affect large animals, because
the physics of small animals are different than the
physics of large animals, um, and again, if you
don't understand those, uh, sort of developmental biasing features,
then you're not gonna understand why you get certain
kinds of evolutionary patterns in those taxa.
Are these developmental processes inherited? I mean, are they
transmitted between generations and if so, how does that
transmission occur? Is it genetically or through other means?
So, for most of the things we've been talking
about, the, uh, there is the genetic transmission of
those developmental processes, so they are inherited and therefore
are a part of what you would expect. To
be involved in evolutionary processes because they're not only
exhibiting variation and fitness differences, but they're also heritable.
Um, IN some cases, uh, those features are not
heritable in the, uh, um, physical sense, um, but
they are, um, heritable in the sense that they
reappear in the environment reliably and are correlated. Um,
FROM ancestor to descendant. So most of the physical
dynamics are gonna be along those lines. The physics
themselves are not inherited by the organism, but the
organism by virtue of being made of certain materials
and being in certain environments, will reliably have those
same physical dynamics occurring each generation. Um, AND therefore,
those sorts of causal effects will always be present,
uh, down through a lineage, uh, through evolutionary time.
Uh, CAN they also be transmitted in any way
through epigenetics
or? So epigenetics, uh, so first we have to
be careful because epigenetics means different things to different
people, but, um, uh, so one kind of epigenetics
would be a, uh, effect on gene expression that
might occur through the methylation of DNA. That, uh,
facilitates or shuts down certain kinds of gene expression,
and if that gets inherited, um, from one generation
to the next, then you can have an evolutionary
effect, um. That way, that's a certain kind of
epigenetics. Another way of thinking about epigenetics is in
terms of all the uh factors that go into
um producing a phenotype. Uh, THAT are sort of
beyond the genetics. So that includes cellular interactions, it
includes some of the physical dynamics we're talking about
before, um, and includes basically anything that's somehow not
strictly genetic. Um, AND on that latter notion, a
lot of the things we've been talking about would
count as epigenetics, um. And therefore, you know, if
you were asking, does epigenetics make a difference for
evolution, the answer would be yes, but there we
would need to be careful because, um, arguably in
that phrasing, we are saying something like much of
development is about epigenetics, and we're saying that development
makes a difference for evolution so that Claim that
epigenetics is involved is maybe not as uh um
uh conceptually novel as uh maybe sometimes is suggested.
It's a rather old claim about the importance of
development itself.
Mhm. What are the evil evil approaches in biology?
So, Ivo Devo approaches in biology constitute a real
mixture of trying to bring different approaches from individual
disciplines together into a common space. So bringing concerns
about population biology, bringing concerns about development and embryogenesis,
bringing concerns about uh comparative biology and phylogenetic uh
uh reconstruction and understanding the relationship between taxa, uh,
as well as thinking in terms of deep time
and understanding patterns of variation in the fossil record.
And Ivodevo approach is typically understood to be a
uh way of representing this combination. Of methods that
are employed, so hence they're called Evodevo because they're
intended to sort of flag that mixture of evolutionary
and developmental approaches uh that get applied to particular
groups of organisms to understand how they evolve. So,
I typically Describe Ivodevo as inherently interdisciplinary, because it
works at the junction of multiple disciplines, and as
a consequence, is both an interesting space. And also
a challenging one, because when you are at the
junction of different disciplines, you also have questions about
how do you understand evidence when these different communities
don't necessarily agree on how to proceed. You know,
how a paleontologist thinks about evidence is very different
than how a developmental biologist thinks about evidence, um,
and how an evolutionary biologist thinks about modeling. IS
very different than how a developmental biologist thinks about
modeling. So how do you bring all those uh
different kinds of scientific approaches together into a mixture
that's productive and what we've seen over time is
that it can be done. But it oftentimes has
pitfalls and um uh key issues that have to
be engaged with in order to do so. And
it's part of the reason why I think Evo
Devo approaches tend to have controversy uh surrounding them.
So, please correct me if I'm wrong, but if
I get the role that uh developmental biology plays
in our understanding of how evolution plays out, then
the traditional picture that we have of a variation
produced by uh genetic, uh, I mean, uh uh
produced genetically across individuals. I mean, the, it's been
the result of a random genetic mutation. And then
selection occurring upon that variation. I mean, the picture
that we get by adding developmental biology to that
is much more complex.
Uh, YES, I do think that that picture is
much more complex. I think that whether or not
it undermines that traditional, uh, view is an open
question. And so a lot of discussion. Over the
past decade or more about say ideas like the
extended evolutionary synthesis have been about to what degree
do some of these uh additions of development and
other factors really call into question the more traditional
understanding. However, as I noted, There are ways that
you can think about including development that would be.
Sort of more or less complimentary to that traditional
picture. Um, AND so I think that, uh, we
really are at a moment of time where the
consequences for sort of thinking about evolution are still
being worked out. Um, WE don't yet have a
sort of common consensus picture for How does development
change the way we view evolution? We've got different
ways of thinking about that, some of them, uh,
more or less compelling, but there still remains controversy.
I think that at the end of the day,
it's now very difficult for somebody to completely go
back to the old view that ignored development, um,
because we've just seen too many ways in which
development can be relevant. At the same time, uh,
that doesn't mean the controversy has somehow been resolved
and there are still key questions, uh, that remain
about how complex is the evolutionary process as a
consequence of taking development seriously.
Right, but even if we are still figuring that
out, if it could undermine the traditional picture of
evolution that I described earlier, in what ways could
that be done?
So I think that to some degree, it depends
on how you sort of cast that traditional picture.
So, one aspect of the traditional picture is gradualism,
that you have gradual transitions. Um, SOME of the
ways in which development occurs seems to suggest step
changes or qualitative thresholds of different kinds. That would
then potentially call into question whether gradualism is always
the way evolutionary change occurs. Um, uh, ANOTHER, uh,
uh, sort of traditional part of that picture is
that natural selection can really take a, uh, uh,
a trait or a population of organisms in any
direction. And, uh, the Empirical work coming out of
development um suggests that that's very implausible. Uh, IT
suggests that there are these constraints and facilitations that
suggest there are certain kinds of expected pathways that
might even be predictable, um, for how evolution occurs
because of development. So those would be two ways
in which the traditional picture could be challenged by,
by development, um, and, you know, at the same
time, uh, that doesn't mean, for example, with respect
to gradualism that because sometimes gradualism could be violated,
it doesn't mean evolutionary change is never gradual. It
actually most likely is some complex combination. Um, AND
similarly for thinking about patterns of evolution, um, just
because we can detect patterns of evolution because of
development, um, it's still the case that there are
lots of possibilities for natural selection to explore. So
in that respect, we could also still see a
very strong creative role for natural selection in shaping
evolutionary outcomes.
And what do you make of the extended evolutionary
synthesis or of that proposal as you mentioned earlier?
I mean, and adding to the picture of things
like epigenetics, cultural evolution, niche construction, and in the
particular case of humans, language and
symboli. Yeah, so the extended evolutionary synthesis has, you
know, as I mentioned before, been around for, um,
more than a decade. Um, uh, KIND of some
of its initial rumblings were in the um mid
2000s. It was a way in which different researchers
could sort of come together and express their discomfort
with the traditional picture and try and articulate an
alternative. I think that the uh reality is that
the alternative picture was not necessarily fully coherent. Um,
IN that it involved a lot of different kinds
of concerns and processes of the kind you just
described. Um, uh, SOME people were interested in plasticity,
and some people were interested in behavior, some people
were interested in, uh, these developmental processes and say
the physical dynamics. And while it's true that each
of them in a way puts some pressure on
the traditional view, they don't necessarily comprise a coherent
alternative. And so I think that uh what we
now see is a little bit more of a
kind of. Wild west open space because we have
an awareness that the old picture is not fully
satisfactory, but we don't have a consensus view of
a new picture. And so what we then have
is a kind of uh um. Uh, OPEN, you
know, space with some pretty severe theoretical differences. Um,
BUT the bottom line is that the extended evolutionary
synthesis itself didn't cohere is that alternative picture. And
so I think that we're still a ways off
from seeing The community kind of come together around
a particular sort of set of theoretical commitments, kind
of like we saw in the mid-twentieth century with
the modern synthesis.
Is there any room at all here for organisms
to be able to direct their own evolution in
any way?
So that's certainly a part of the claims that
have been made, especially on behalf of niche construction
theory, where the idea is that organisms are, by
their behavior, reshaping their environment, as a consequence, they're
changing the selective pressures that affect their evolution, uh,
in the sense of the populations through time. I
think that those possibilities um are uh difficult to
cash out because in traditional modeling, you can capture
those effects as uh uh simply features of the
environment, and so you see some of this discussion
going on. About whether niche construction is just another
perspective on what has already been said. Among evolutionary
biologists. But I do think that, uh, in recent
years, there's been increased appreciation of how much animal
behavior, um, and more broadly, any organismal behavior. Can
make a tremendous difference on the environmental circumstances that
make up uh the uh natural selection pressures that
are experienced and therefore, it seems, uh, Somewhat maybe.
CLEAR that there is uh a number of pathways
for behavior from organisms to make a difference. Um,
HOWEVER, exactly how and why seems like it remains
a uh subject of contention.
So tell us now about evolvability. You mentioned it
earlier, uh, you mentioned it a little bit earlier,
but tell us more about it. What is evolvability?
So evolvability at a sort of very basic level
is simply the capacity to evolve. So if we
say that a population um exhibits evolvability, we're saying
that the population uh exhibits variation that allows it
to respond to selective pressures, um, uh, should those
happen. However, What becomes really interesting about evolvability is
paying attention to sort of how it shows up.
That is, are we thinking about evolvability for a
particular trait? Are we thinking about evolvability for a
particular body plan? Are we thinking about evolvability for
um say cells, uh, and their sort of capacities
at lower levels of organization. So once you start
thinking about what is being attributed to evolvability. It
starts to become very interesting very fast. So many
people have gotten interested in how, um, especially developing
systems can be evolvable because they can have properties
that allow them to uh be responsive to different
kinds of environmental changes, um, and people have gotten
really interested in. The, uh, capacity for evolvability of
particular traits, because it seems like some traits, uh,
are more malleable, um, and subject to evolutionary change
than others, and so, uh, trying to understand what
are the, the genetic basis, uh, what's the genetic
basis for that. What's the relationship between the, um,
the genotype and the phenotype that would make something
more evolvable or less evolvable, um, but generally, like
I said before, evolvability sort of shifts the emphasis
from Constraints or limitations to facilitation and possibilities. And
so researchers are often interested in evolvability because they're
interested in trying to understand how can evolutionary change
be facilitated and um uh sort of uh Encouraged
in certain directions simply by virtue of the setup
of the system or the setup of the cell
or the setup of the population.
And do we know which factors play a role
in evolvability, which factors make particular organisms or particular
traits more or less evolvable?
So it does seem like we have some insights
into um uh some of those features. Um, FOR
example, it appears that organisms that are sort of
more modular, that is, they have sort of more
independent parts. Uh, TEND to have a, uh, higher
degree of evolvability because those parts then seem to
be changeable independently of one another over evolutionary time.
As an in an organism that is sort of
overly integrated, that is all the parts are tightly
connected together, is going to be less evolvable, um,
and so the oftentimes more modular parts, um, you
tend to see that. This is especially visible in
arthropods, who have many segments, and there are many
segments are subject to modifications, including um different kinds
of appendages, duplications of the number of segments, um.
Uh, SPECIALIZATIONS of those segments and all kinds of
patterns seem to be encouraged by having those sorts
of modular parts. Um, SO those sorts of patterns
do seem like we can detect that, um, they
have an evolutionary significance. At the same time, we're
still trying to understand other things that seem to
underlie evolvability, especially. Um, ON longer time scales, to
what degree, um, especially does a certain kind of
genetic architecture for traits make a difference, um, especially
over, uh, transitions from short term to long term
time scales, because much of what we can study
is on shorter time. Time scales in terms of
experimental interventions, but oftentimes for evolutionary patterns we're interested
in these longer time scales, and the question is
to what degree do the things we detect on
the shorter time scales hold or make a difference
on the longer time scales, and those things are,
you know, hard to determine, but we're making progress.
And how is evolve evolvability studied?
So evolvability is studied uh in a kind of
evo diva way with many approaches. So you can
study evolvability using uh resources from quantitative genetics, you
can study evolvability using resources from developmental biology, you
can study evolvability using resources from paleontology. And sort
of the fossil record. So evolvability is really something
that can be studied by many different disciplines and
is naturally one of the uh places where Evodevo
researchers have been most interested. In fact, some people
have even claimed that evolvability is the sort of
central defining concept for Evodevo because it Gives an
identity to the community for bringing together all these
different methods and approaches um in the first place.
And so let me ask you now about evolutionary
novelties. What are they?
So, evolutionary novelties um are sort of typically thought
to be those new features that emerge in the
history of life that weren't previously there. So, uh,
at one point in history, there were no jaws
on, um, vertebrate organisms. And so at some point
you get the evolution of jaws. It likely took
place over a long period of time, but the
evolutionary novelty, the jaws themselves become a subject of
study. How did those originate? What, what made it
possible for these to occur? And part of why
we're interested in is, is exactly. Because so many
taxa now have jaws, right? So it's like once
this evolved, it became a regular feature of organisms,
um, uh, eyes would be another example, or lungs
or sort of these major features people, you know,
wanna know. Well, how did that originate in the
first place? Where did it come from? So, uh,
one of the things that Ivo Devo has also
been very focused on is evolutionary novelties because it
seems like we do need to understand developmental processes
that could have been relevant to those origination events
um in the past. So, an evolutionary novelty is
uh gonna be defined as a sort of new
feature um within the history of uh life that
doesn't seem to have a sort of comparable, uh,
homologue, um, somewhere in the past. That is, we
don't think, oh, jaws were sort of transformed from
something that was already jaw-like. We're thinking that jaws
emerged um in this sort of interesting way such
that they took on a separate identity. That was
really distinct from what whatever was present beforehand. Um,
BUT as you can probably tell, that's what makes
it so hard. It's a really difficult problem to
figure out, you know, how did you get, uh,
uh, this new feature, given that, uh, it didn't
exist previously uh in the lineage.
Uh, AND do we have a good understanding or
any understanding, understanding of how evolutionary novelties are generated,
and I guess that this would tie to some
of the topics we've already explored there,
right. So, I would say, um, it depends. A
little bit on who you ask, but I do
think that we have made tremendous gains in our
understanding of the origin of evolutionary novelties because we
have been able to study developmental processes at a
much Deeper mechanistic level than was possible um 50
to 75 years ago. And so I think we
do have good insights now into particular developmental changes
that were relevant for the origin of new features,
whether they're jaws or uh something else, and Those
are things that clearly will continue to be studied.
It's not like they're studied and we finished and
we go home, but rather that we've, you know,
made good leaps and strides in recognizing that this
developmental, uh, um, aspect of the organism. Can be
changed in such a way as to generate something
new, um, and that's a sort of achievement scientifically
to have understood that. At the same time, I
think precisely because um many evolutionary novelties um are
distinctive in their sort of features. It makes it
harder to always understand whether when we learn something
about one evolutionary novelty, how much does that tell
us about another one. So if we learn something
about the origin of Jaws. Does that tell us
something important about, say, the origin of other features
that we're interested in? And sometimes the answer seems
to be yes, and sometimes the answer seems to
be no, um, and so the generalization potential for
some of the studies of evolutionary novelties is one
of its persistent challenges.
Do evolutionary novelties link in any way to evolvability?
That is, if a particular organism is more evolvable
than another, is it capable of generating more evolutionary
novelties or evolutionary novelties more easily?
Uh, SO, the answer is yes, and it goes
in both directions. So, an organism, uh, or a
population of organisms that exhibits evolvability with respect to
certain features is in many ways more likely to
generate evolutionary novelties because of that capacity. At the
same time, and the origin of a of a
of an evolutionary novelty can actually contribute to evolvability
and make it possible for more evolutionary change to
take place. Um, AND again, the origin of Jaws
is, uh, a kind of nice example of that
because once you have the basic, uh, setup of
Jaws, now we can sort of See what possible
evolution can happen once you have jaws, and jaws
are quite modifiable in lots of different ways to
support lots of different organisms living in lots of
different ways on land, sea, and air. Um, SO
I think there's a nice kind of interconnection between
evolvability and evolutionary novelty such that if we study
evolutionary novelties, we can understand how uh lineages become
more evolvable, but also if we study evolvability, we
can understand why some lineages generate evolutionary novelties.
So in regards to evolutionary novelties in your work,
I read about stress mechanisms and, I mean, perhaps
you would have uh an other examples, but what
are stress mechanisms and how do they contribute to
evolutionary novelties?
Yeah, so the work you're referring to was collaborative
uh research that I did with the biologist, Gunter
Wagner, and, uh, one of the things that we
were interested in was The way in which um
systems experience stresses um on a regular basis, um,
whether that's, you know, temperature stresses or certain kinds
of, uh, physiological stress due to um life history
stages like pregnancy. And whether or not these sorts
of things might be relevant for evolution, and especially
the origin of novelties. So what we were interested
in was You know, to what degree that might
be the case, and part of the reason why
we were interested was because there were patterns across
the tree of life. That seemed to suggest that
stress mechanisms, so the kinds of uh mechanisms that
are associated with stress responses, seem to also be
deeply woven into normal developmental processes. So why would
it be the case that those stress mechanism features
seem like they get incorporated into regular development? And
so we put forward uh the basic idea that
uh there is a way for stress to be
generative of new features. Through a process uh that
uh uh we described in a couple of papers,
um, that goes through multiple steps where first a
stress uh response occurs in, in relation to a
regular stressor, and then what happens is that the
organism starts to anticipate. That stress and in that
anticipation of the stress, uh, you can get the
establishment of a new feature like a new cell
type that actually protects against the stress and therefore
by you get new features. Through a kind of
response to stress over time and the organism's physiology,
which would also account for why you get this
signature of the stress mechanisms being involved, because they
were originally involved and they've been co-opted in. To
the new feature, so that it can uh sort
of be a regular protector. Uh, SO there's a
number of cases that we described in the paper,
uh, some of which were in Gunter's, uh, work
on the uh origins of mammalian pregnancy. Specifically looking
at a stress, uh, what seemed to be a
stress-induced, um, uh, evolution of a cell type, um,
uh, that, uh, Seemed to be able to prevent
the fetus, uh, from causing inflammatory reactions in the,
uh, uterus, um, of the, of the female, um,
or, uh, you know, that was carrying the, the
fetus. And so, by looking at a number of
those cases, it, it seemed to us that there
was a relatively compelling case for looking more closely.
At how, uh, this kind of stress induced, uh,
responsiveness over evolutionary time might be specially uh related
to the evolution of novelties. At the same time,
we were not trying to say that somehow it
was going to explain every novelty. It was rather
that we thought it had been a neglected feature
in some of the studies of evolutionary novelty. Um,
AND therefore we wanted to draw it to people's
attention.
Are there other kinds of mechanisms like these that
might contribute also to uh evolutionary novelties?
So, a number of people have uh been very
interested in how uh the physical dynamics of development
might be uh pertinent for, uh, the generation of
evolutionary novelty. So, as I mentioned before, if you
think about development as having, uh, say qualitative thresholds,
um, uh, whereby you switch from one state to
another, and that switch from one state to another
is a function of certain kinds of physical dynamics,
then some people have argued, um, Stuart Newman is
probably the most prominent one. Um, THAT, uh, you
can actually get new features through, uh, physical dynamic
changes happening during development, um, and that might have
been, uh, more present earlier in evolutionary history, um,
uh, rather than as much as it is today.
So there might have been a way in which
it occurred longer ago and Uh, set up some
of the, uh, landscape of animal, uh, morphologies that
we see today. So I think that Whether it's
physical dynamics or stress mechanisms, um, I think a
lot of people are interested in, uh, putting forward
different kinds of models to understand. Like how is
it that we can get new features, and in
many ways, a lot of these models are not
competing directly with each other, uh, but in fact,
uh, can uh be complementary in our understanding of
the complex ways in which new features originate during
evolution.
OK, so I have one last question for you
then. And going all the way back to the
beginning of our conversation, um, how do you look
at the future of developmental biology and the role
that it might play in our understanding of how
evolution occurs?
So that's a big question to end on, but
a good one. I think that, uh, a couple
things seem relevant. So, you know, as a philosopher,
one of my main interests and all of the
things we've been talking about is sort of how
the scientists Proceed to reason and think and practice
what they do to make progress on these uh
questions. And I think that what we have seen,
uh, especially over the last, uh, decade or so
is that, um, there has been an increased willingness
among many researchers in different disciplines to collaborate um
in this interdisciplinary fashion that Ivodevo, uh, in particular
seems to, uh, nurture. So, I think that, uh,
you know, going forward, one of the most important
things will be the degree to which these kinds
of collaborations, um, uh, are sort of supported by
funding agencies, um, because sometimes funding agencies can be
a little bit more conservative in what they fund
because interdisciplinary projects are a little bit more risky.
They're a little bit less clear on uh what
they will generate, but I think that uh what
we've seen is that when they are pursued well,
um they really produce very interesting results. So I
would say that My hope and I think to
some degree expectation. Um, FOR, say, the next 10
years is to see continued interdisciplinary interactions, including, uh,
with, uh, theoreticians and, uh, even a few philosophers
to try and really think through the complex problem
spaces that biologists are exploring by looking at evolvability,
evolutionary novelty, and the relationship between development. And evolution
more broadly.
And do you expect that even if not through
uh a sort of extended evolutionary synthesis that at
least in the future we would have a much
richer and complex understanding of how evolution plays out
through developmental processes.
Absolutely, and I think that's what we are already
seeing. I think that even if the extended evolutionary
synthesis as a sort of movement. Uh, SORT of
falls by the wayside. I think what won't disappear
are the genuine empirical and theoretical achievements that have
been accomplished by researchers, um, in recent decades, and
that will likely, you know, take some form. As
it's presented in textbooks to the next generation of
scientists, uh, but the bottom line is that that
next generation of scientists is gonna get a much
richer and more complex starting picture of the evolutionary
process than you or I had when we started
out.
Great, so Doctor Love, before we go, would you
like to tell people where they can find you
and your work on the Internet?
So you can find my work at my homepage,
um, which if you do a basic, uh, browser
search in Google or something else on Alan Love,
philosopher, you'll be able to find my page, um,
and, uh, I'm also happy to interact with anyone
who has further questions about my work or, um,
uh, potentially needs access to a reprint or something
like that. Uh, YOU can uh just email me
at ALOVE@Un.edu.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you very much, Ricardo. I really enjoyed the
conversation.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David
Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londono Correa.
Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynaleb medicine,
Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon
Scorteus Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the
Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old
Heringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert,
Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner,
Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike
Levine, and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom
Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and
Nick Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender,
Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for
all.